Planning a project.
First, clarifying the goal.
Why does our company need a competence model?
How will this model be used?
How interested are top managers, management, and shareholders in the project?
Second, time resources.
How much time do we have?
Third, creating a project.
Who will lead the project?
How many people will be included in the working group?
Who will collect and analyze the information?
Why do you need this?
How will your company use it?
Who will join your project group and team?
Try to formulate and answer these questions.
This will be a good foundation for the future project.
Let's move on to the next stage.
Designing a competence model.
As I said, this is the most time-consuming and laborious stage.
Because we need to collect the information and analyze it.
The result of this stage is the formation of a list of competencies.
So, collecting information.
Our goals.
First, we need to collect examples of behavior standards that ensure effective performance.
Second, we need to determine the standards that may be required for effective performance in the future.
Where can we get this information?
We need to understand how the company works today.
What behavior, working behavior is stimulated by the company today.
What actions lead to effective performance of the work.
First of all, we have a number of sources from which we can get this information.
Some sources answer the question who.
The other part answers the question what.
If we talk about who can help us with this.
First, the employees themselves.
Of course.
We can ask the employees how they do their job.
How do they achieve results?
What do they do to achieve these results?
We can ask employees about their colleagues.
We can ask questions to managers.
We can ask questions to clients.
If we work in the service business in the B2C sphere.
We can ask questions to partners.
If they work with us for a long time, they can answer the questions.
What behavior, what actions do they evaluate as excellent?
The next important source of information that is often forgotten is mentors and coaches.
They should be asked.
If they are mentors in production, their job is to prepare and train young and not very specialists.
The same with coaches.
If we have a training center, the programs are developed to improve the professionalism of our employees.
To develop their professional competencies.
These are the people, these are the categories of employees that you need to start with.
And, by the way, involve in the design team.
The next part of the sources answers the question what.
What are the documents?
What documents?
Of course, it all depends on what documents we have.
But it is important to remember that there is always a number of documents at the level of the entire enterprise.
Someone has a strategic plan, a business plan.
These are formulated strategic goals if it is a public company.
This is a mission, this is a corporate code, and so on.
It is clear that there are companies where there is nothing.
There are companies where everything is, but nothing works.
We must approach the tools that are used by employees in their daily activities.
Thus, documents at the company level, documents at the division level, and documents at the employee level.
This is a professional manual, for example.
Some reminders, recommendations, and so on.
Maybe a professional manual, someone will say that professional manuals do not work.
They are written many years ago, and only guests from the labor inspection are waiting.
This is definitely true.
But even in such companies, for example, there may be a certain reminder to the cashier how to work with the buyers.
From this reminder, we will draw information on what standards of behavior, from the point of view of us, from the point of view of our company,
ensure the effective performance of the work of the cashier, that is, the quality of service of the buyers and visitors.
So, we have determined the sources that are at our disposal.
Now a few words about the methods of collecting information.
There are various methods.
This can be an analysis of the work or monitoring of the employee's activities.
This can be conducting surveys or interviews.
Conducting focus groups, brainstorming, working groups with employees and managers.
It is important for us to understand what methods are applicable in our particular case to work with a certain group of employees.
It is clear that we can use the observation method, for example, for the seller in the trading room.
But we will not be able to monitor the accountant in any way to collect the standards of behavior that he uses in his work.
Conducting surveys.
The survey is a very difficult thing.
And to formulate complex and incomprehensible questions about what qualities should an employee have to be successful in this position in a certain survey sheet,
well, it is possible, but probably not what is necessary.
Because by filling in such survey sheets, employees can simply unsubscribe and we will not get the valid information that we need.
The best way is an interview.
This is a conversation.
This is a situation when we prepare the questions that we need.
Even if we somehow, by guiding questions, bring the employee to the answers that we need,
we get the information that we need.
In addition to the interview, the next most frequently used tool is holding work groups.
Work groups within one unit.
Work groups for, say, a one-level manager.
Work groups for employees of two units, so that they can evaluate each other if they are very active in their activities, actively interact.
There are several other methods that help us a lot when carrying out this project.
This is the method of repertory grids, the method of critical incidents, the method of direct attributes.
Let's open them up and see what it is.
The method of repertory grids is as follows.
The head of the unit fills out a certain table.
We can imagine the information in the form of such a table, in which the names of his subordinates are listed vertically.
There may be key employees if the unit is very large.
And on top are listed the skills and qualities that are required for successful work.
The head of the unit fills out and describes how each of the subordinates demonstrates the skills and qualities that are necessary.
It turns out that someone does well.
For example, if this is the head of the sales department and he fills out this table for sales managers,
we see that someone best establishes and establishes partnerships with the client, establishes relations.
He best negotiates phone meetings.
Another employee does the presentation best, because he knows the product, benefits, benefits, products or services.
Someone works great with objections.
Thus, we get a certain grid.
Therefore, the method of repertory grids, in which various examples of behavior of employees are listed,
among which we can choose how successful they are.
And it is not necessary that they will belong to someone.
And not really.
Thus, we are the developers of this project, we get a certain matrix with behavior standards.
It is important to help the manager when filling out such tables, such grids,
or to explain very well how and what he needs to do.
Because later we will check the behavior standards that she determines during the working game,
in which those employees may be present, who were described in this table.
The same manager will be present, possibly clients.
Thus, by collecting information, we will constantly check its validity during the entire stage.
How valuable, how objective information we have.
The next method is the method of critical incidents,
which allows us to determine the behavioral reactions,
which were important in a certain critical situation.
We organize and conduct a structured interview for employees, their managers, their colleagues,
asking questions and asking them to tell about the situation,
about some real case in which a serious mistake was made or an important success was achieved,
and about what actions they took, how they behaved in order to make it happen,
or vice versa, if there was a mistake, what they did not do in that case,
and how they can evaluate it now.
The next method is the method of direct attributes.
Within this method, the linear managers are offered a description of the ready-made competencies.
We ask them to evaluate them, compare these competencies in pairs,
to determine the most important ones from their point of view.
This method is good to use in case when you have already formulated competencies,
when you have already gone a long way for some kind of testing,
because it will be very interesting if the competencies that you have recognized as important
are not chosen by the top managers and they will say that this is not the most important thing in our activity,
this is a kind of verification.
We have said several times that we conduct interviews or work groups.
It is important to determine what questions we ask our employees or managers.
After all, you will get such an answer when you ask a question,
but we need a definite answer, we need an answer about standard behaviors.
So, what are we asking?
We always formulate a list of questions at home, we are always preparing for this.
As an example, what kind of question can it be?
For example, we can ask what qualities should an employee have to be successful in his or her position?
And in response to this question, we will get a list of qualities, characteristics,
something from the field of knowledge, about what is necessary for success in the position that we are analyzing.
Our next question will sound like this.
And how will this actually manifest itself at the behavioral level?
After all, if competence is behavior, then again, it is not enough to know something and be able to do something, you need to do it.
Therefore, the next question we ask our employees is about the language of behavior.
How will this be expressed in the daily activities of an employee?
The next question that must be asked is whether the selected competencies are really important.
After all, maybe these competencies are in the employees' units, but this is not the most priority for the performance of the position.
It's good that there is, it's good that we have it, but the priority is important to define competently.
The next important question is whether we can and how we will collect information in order to evaluate an employee on these competencies.
For example, very often companies define such competence as loyalty.
This is a very valuable competence, most often it is related to the category of corporate.
But very often the company says, it is important for our employees to be loyal to us.
But only then this competence can be recognized, can be, let's say, accepted and voiced as their corporate competencies.
When you have decided for yourself, how will you understand whether an employee is loyal or not loyal?
He says about it, maybe he says, but he is not loyal.
And someone is silent, frowning, but in his actions he shows a high level of loyalty.
This is necessary to answer these questions at the stage of collecting information.
Will we be able to collect or not? How will we collect it?
Because later, having this information, it will be easier for us to formulate the competencies that we will choose as the main ones and include them in the corporate model.
The next step in this stage is the analysis of information.
If we did everything right and did everything qualitatively, we collected a large amount of information.
And what do we need to do? We need to analyze what is priority and what is not.
And develop a general structure of the competence model, the priorities that are necessary.
My recommendation is that work is most often done within the framework of additional working groups,
which are made up of the most active participants who have shown themselves at the stage of collecting information.
My recommendation is to duplicate the work.
What does this mean?
This means that you conduct one, two, or even three working groups that are dedicated to the same issue.
It is necessary to develop a list of competencies.
And the same list of competencies is developed by all three groups,
so that later, having presented their results to each other again, they can discuss and come to a consensus.
This method works very well when you work with a group of linear managers and formulate corporate competencies.
By dividing linear managers into several groups and suggesting each group to determine the corporate competencies
that you will include in the future model, you will see how managers,
first joining the work within their group, will then either protect their developments or accept others'.
But in any case, you should reach a compromise by discussing it within the entire team.
Therefore, we must duplicate the analytical work.
After that, we discuss.
After that, we choose a name.
The name should be short and concise.
After all, as you name the ship, it will sail.
Therefore, the name of the competency should characterize its future content as much as possible.
It is important to understand that each company is unique and each company has its own language.
There are many disputes about the competence of leadership, for example.
Some companies declare this competence as corporate, required for all employees.
Others define this competence as managerial, that is, a competence for managers.
Some say that leadership is a concept that cannot be measured, and a person was born a leader or not.
There are no right or wrong.
It is important to understand how we have determined this competence.
And if we talk about leadership, we describe a competent leader and, in fact, we fill it with the definition of the competence of working with people,
managing people or managing employees, managing a team.
Teams are our own choice.
What we call, what we define is only our choice.
Thus, competencies that are called the same in different companies can have completely different meanings and describe completely different behavior.
At this stage, it is necessary to eliminate repetitions.
Competences, which is important, should not intersect.
What does it mean to intersect?
As an example, a company defines competence as professionalism.
Let's start with the fact that this competence is not quite clear, because professionalism is like a professional competence.
But there are companies that take it to the corporate level.
We are all professionals.
There is also a competence, for example, as an orientation to development.
We value those who study, we study ourselves, we create an environment in which our employees study.
On the one hand, these are two different competencies.
But on the other hand, you always need to understand what professionalism is.
Professionalism, when it is defined as a corporate competence, that is, for all employees, and does not carry some narrowly specialized orientation,
most often under professionalism, the ability to learn, the desire to learn, to develop, and so on, is understood.
It may turn out that we are talking about the same thing, although competencies are called differently.
How to check?
It is very simple.
You need to find an employee who has, and in general, answer the question, can it be so in our company,
when an employee has one competence and does not have a second competence.
Let's say, when he is very professional, but absolutely oriented to development.
In that case, if we intersect these competencies, we will answer for ourselves, this cannot be.
And if this cannot be, then most likely the competencies are the same.
Can we check another competence, the orientation to development and the team player?
Are these competencies different or similar?
We must remember a person who is oriented to development, who is drawn to knowledge, but is not a team player.
Can it be so?
Of course it can.
And vice versa.
A person who is a team player, who, let's say, sets the goals of the team above his own, but at the same time is absolutely not oriented to development.
It can be so.
And it can be so.
Thus, these competencies do not intersect, and we can include both of these competencies in our model.
The next thing we do at this stage is to check validity.
What does it mean?
It means that every time we understand and look at, let's say, those lights, that compass, we are going the right way.
Are the employees who demonstrate competence really doing their job more effectively than those who do not demonstrate?
What does it mean?
It means that are the competencies that we have recognized as priority really owned by those employees who are successful today?
It should be so.
If it is somehow different, and we made a mistake and took the wrong direction, and prioritized the wrong competencies,
it will turn out that we will somehow get off the road on a certain path, which is not yet clear where it will lead.
Therefore, at the stage of the demo, we always test and check.
After all, we wrote it down and took these behavior standards from the activities of the same best employees.
In fact, our circle will close and everything should match.
But it is necessary to check every time.
Because if we define other priorities for our company, it means that we will simply lead the company in a different direction.
That we will stimulate and develop some other behavior.
This can only be in one case, if the company strategy has changed.
If yesterday we were aggressive, seized the market, we valued competencies, let's say, from this area,
and today we said, that's it, the market is at our feet, we are improving the quality, we are talking about the service, and so on.
In this case, there may be a departure from the main road to another road.
But only if we understand this initially and set it up initially.
In case there were no such drastic changes in our strategy, then again.
Those competencies that we have defined must necessarily correspond to the behavior that our effective employees show in their work today.
As we have already said, the result of this stage is a formulated list of competencies.
Let's look at the slides, on which a number of examples with corporate competencies of various companies are given.
Let's look and comment on them.
What will we see?
At the first stage, we see a model of competencies, consisting of 11 competencies, which are divided into 3 clusters.
Under the clusters, competencies can be combined into one group.
Here we see 3 clusters.
Business development, achievement of results, work with people.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that here we do not see a list of professional, administrative and corporate competencies.
But most likely, work with people will be administrative competencies or, at least, leadership competencies.
Administrative competencies will include business vision and setting goals from the achievement of results cluster.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the presentation of a model of competencies, its final formulation, is always our choice.
It is how we define it.
In the next slide, we see a model of competencies, which includes 8 competencies,
among which 3 corporate competencies, 3 administrative competencies and 3 professional competencies for sales department employees, as indicated in the slide.
Next, a model of competencies is given, which is called a model of leadership competencies.
It consists of 16 competencies, divided into 5 clusters.
It is a question of the limit of competencies.
Once again, there should be as many competencies as you can work with.
There are examples where competencies can be 4 or 5.
There can be competencies for employees or for leaders.
Once again, this choice is made by each company, depending on what goals it set for itself at the very beginning,
for what tasks competencies were developed.
The more competencies a model contains, the more difficult it is to apply.
It is difficult to identify specific competencies in an excessively detailed model,
since the differences between individual competencies in such a model can be incredibly small.
Therefore, do not chase a large number, do not say about it, well, to yourself, yes,
I warn you that we can have 20, or 18, or 15.
Formulate 10, but for workers, which you will use and apply in all policies and procedures of staff management.
You will use it during selection, during evaluation events,
those competencies for which you develop development methods and will develop them with employees.
Our next stage, the fourth stage, is the development of the level of competencies models.
At this stage, we solve several tasks.
First, we determine how many levels our competencies will have.
What options can be here?
First, it happens that competencies can be undetailed, they can be simple.
Thus, the company sets a certain level, a certain behavior that is necessary for the company employees.
Let's go back to the loyalty, which we have already talked a little about.
Loyalty can be difficult to break down by levels.
The initial level, the level of development, the level of skill, and so on.
The company simply determines that a loyal employee for us is the employee who does not harm the company in his actions.
Let him not shout at every corner about us, he does not walk all in the attributes and logos of the company,
but he behaves ethically towards the company,
and even if he is dissatisfied or does not understand some decisions, he does not speak about it right and left.
This is a minimum.
This is a simple undetailed competence.
But most often, companies develop competencies at the level.
For what?
In order to understand what is needed to take the next step.
Development programs are developed for the achievement of the next level.
The question is, how many levels should there be?
You answer this question yourself, because there are no standard answers.
It can be four levels, it can be three levels, it can be seven levels.
In my practice, I have come across companies that have a seven-level model of competence,
consisting of 10 competencies, which works great, because everything is very specific, clear and labeled by level.
Therefore, how many?
Most often, four are determined.
You can meet three or four levels.
The next important step is to determine the minimum and maximum level of competence development.
Let's look at the following slides with examples of various competencies.
Let's take the example of competence of working with clients.
We can see that this competence consists of four levels.
The first level sounds like the level of competence development that corresponds to this level.
It can find a common language with people, it can negotiate with a manager or a colleague,
but it is limited in making decisions about working with clients.
Can this behavior be sufficient for a position in our organization?
Yes, it can.
It can be a novice sales specialist.
Thus, we understand that this first level is a working level, acceptable for us.
What about the first level of competence and perseverance?
Let's look at the first level, the level of development.
This employee may refuse a planned action plan when facing difficulties.
In some cases, his projects and plans remain unfinished.
He does not strive to overcome obstacles in achieving goals,
and the difficulties that arise may stop him from achieving his plans.
Can such an employee be in our company?
Of course, he can.
Can this behavior be desirable for a position?
Most likely, no.
Thus, we can see that despite the fact that in the competence and perseverance we see three levels of development,
we understand that the first level is a non-working level,
it will never be acceptable for any position.
There will be two working levels, the level of competence and the level of skill.
Thus, this is an example of a three-level model with two working levels.
The previous competence, the work with clients, is an example of a four-level competence with four working levels.
Therefore, we need to determine what the first level will be.
Will it be positive or negative and insufficient?
How do our colleagues answer this question?
In fact, it is easier to start with working levels,
as in the example of competence and work with clients.
This way we will make our lives a little easier
and will not formulate the zero non-working level for all competencies in our model.
But we will understand that if this is the first level,
then we will always have a zero in our work,
when the competence is not developed,
when even this is not required at the initial level.
Then we will not mark anything and will understand it for ourselves.
Other companies say that they will define it so that it is clear,
so that it is working,
so that we explain to everyone that if it does not correspond,
then do not mark anything at all,
or do not put it on the axis if we depict it in the form of a graph, and so on.
I formulate this zero level for all non-working competencies.
It is undesirable, not for any position.
Therefore, we answer this question again.
We are talking about determining the minimum,
the acceptable minimum level.
The following we define.
What is the most desirable for us?
What will be the fourth level or the level of skill?
It is very important not to overestimate,
that there are no such people at all,
and there will never be, but we have formulated it for ourselves.
It is better to take it from a certain practice,
or from those strong specialists who exist.
We can say that these are our standards,
and we would like all our employees to be treated in the same way.
Or if we do not have such specialists for any reason,
then we define a certain maximum level,
but again, we try to remain as objective as possible.
So that there are such positions where this level would be required,
and it would be possible to develop or find a person with such a level of competence.
And again, the next and again mandatory step is to check the validity or value of the level of competence relative to real activity.
After all, having determined the levels, the next step will be to form the profiles of positions.
And therefore, we will arrange all our positions with you relative to those levels.
Take several positions from different areas for the sake of example,
and impose on those levels whether it works or not.
It turns out objectively or it turns out somehow strange,
that, for example, all employees should have the highest level of development in several positions.
Maybe something has not been worked out,
maybe the levels that you have determined in the competencies themselves do not correspond to each other.
For example, by revealing the competence of orientation to development,
you took a very big step between levels.
And by revealing the competence of teamwork, you took small steps.
And, accordingly, the competencies are not valid relative to each other.
This is again and again necessary to check.
Check how? By the example of real positions that exist in the company.
Apply, analyze and understand whether they correspond or not.
The next step.
Well, the next step is a kind of reward.
And only those who have not turned the way at the stage of formulating the list,
at the third and fourth stages of level development.
At this stage, we form competencies profiles for specific positions.
Our goals.
First, we need to check how competencies exactly correspond to all the working roles that exist in the company.
How do we do it?
We do not do it on our own.
It is important that the line managers do it.
The managers of those units for which we form positions.
If the line manager understands how to do it, then we have developed a convenient model.
If he does not understand, then we work with him together,
helping and necessarily getting feedback from him.
If some competence, let's say, he cannot determine it,
then maybe it is not the most important competence.
We get answers to these questions during this stage.
Ideally, we need to make profiles of those positions
for which we will conduct evaluation events.
This is the beginning. This is the first and most important.
That is, this project must be completed by developing the profile of positions.
Ideally, this is the development of the profile of positions for all the positions of our company.
I would like to draw your attention to the following slides,
on which the profile of the position of the regional representative is given.
On two different slides, you see two options for presenting the profile of the position.
It can be either in the form of a table,
in which the level of development is indicated.
In fact, with such a table, you come to the linear manager
and offer to determine and create a profile for the position of his division.
When there is a list of competencies,
and when there is a description of each of the levels for each competence.
And by and large, the manager, reading, understands what corresponds,
what he would like to correspond.
Another option is in the form of a web, in the form of a certain schedule.
This web is very convenient to use,
because at first we can put the required level of development on it,
or the very profile of the position.
And after conducting evaluation procedures,
we put aside the current level of development of the competencies of our employees.
And we can clearly see where there are some gaps.
Let's think.
In our example, there are 11 competencies.
If the level of development for each of the three competencies is lower,
it means that we can clearly see and understand
that these are the competencies that require development,
and that under these competencies it is necessary to form development plans.
Or vice versa.
When the current level of the employee exceeds the required level,
then it is a signal to us that this employee needs to be retained.
Or we include him in the personnel reserve.
But there are not always companies with the opportunity to include employees in the personnel reserve.
Therefore, in any case, we must understand
that the level of development of the competence of an employee is very high,
and we need to use it.
We can involve him as a mentor,
as a functional coach in our training project for other employees.
In any case, this is a signal to us that the employee needs to be retained.
Unfortunately, this is the contradiction of our life.
First, we invest in the development of the competence of our employees.
If we are successful, then we invest in maintaining this employee in our company,
if we are interested in him.
So, we talked about our main actions at various stages of the project
on the development of the competence model.
We talked about the stage of preparation of the project itself and the formation of the project team.
We talked about what we do, what we collect and analyze information
at the stage of formulating the list of competencies.
The next stage is the development of the level of the competence model.
And it all ends with the fact that we develop the profiles of the positions.